7-11-2009 / 7h22
Notes on Cost of Network Trust:
* Algorithmic Game Theory, main ingredients, lack of central control, like distributed computing, selfish participants, common in many settings, e.g., Internet, exciting area with many open problems, Cost of anarchy in other network games, Design games with low cost of anarchy
* Consequences / Cost of Asymmetric Information, Limits of Contracting
* Business Process Management ends up being a strategic game of human-to-human interaction where system dynamics and social dynamics are bedfellows
* Trust in networks, high trust, low trust, cost of credibility, cost of honest signals
* Screening and Signalling as methods of achieving legitimate information
* Problems of Actual Contracting, Limited information processing capabilities = too expensive trying to figure out everything that may happen, unforeseen contingencies, opportunistic behaviour, or imperfect commitment
* Contractual incompleteness produced by, Unforeseen circumstances, Costly calculations and contracting on improbable contingencies, the Imprecision of Language, Inherently imprecise, adding more provisions in the contract can increase, not reduce, probability of disputes
* BRAND STRENGTH qua credibility and legitimacy, + cost of honest signals
* Practical responses to problems caused by incomplete contracting, Spot market contracts, Relational contracts = Agreements concerning the general features of the relationship, Effective when potential conflicts are small, and neither party inclined to be too opportunistic, Implicit contracts, Unarticulated but shared expectations that the parties have concerning the relationship.
* Incomplete contracting adds costs: the interpretation of the original contract may change over time creating unforeseen costs, Disincentives for entering an optimal transaction at all, for fear of 1.
* Important concepts: Reneging, One of the parties refuse to honor the contract; Renegotiation (alternative to reneging), Changing conditions, renegotiation may be in the interest of one of the two parties, May sometimes be more efficient than holding on to the original, One of the parts may still find it better to stick to the original contract, How much should that part be paid?
* The Hold-Up Problem: example of post contractual opportunism, To avoid the hold-up problem the same firm should own co-specialized assets, Another way of achieving commitment: Elimination of alternatives.
* The role of reputations: Loss of reputation = a major cost, Explains the importance of proprietary trade marks and brand names, The size of the cost depends on Frequency of Transactions, Horizon of Transactions, and Profitability of Transaction, Implication for relational contracting: The party which is assigned discretion in the case of the unforeseen events should be the one with the most to lose from damaged reputation.
* Private Information and Pre Contractual Opportunism: Strategic Misrepresentation, Adverse Selection
* Strategic misrepresentation: Bargaining, Informational asymmetries, Strategic misrepresentation, Efficient trade may be unattainable, Incentive compatibility constraints, Constraints that specify which values will encourage honest reporting from those involved.
* Is truthful reporting likely?  The other part’s evaluation unobservable, Is there a set of prices that encourage truthful reporting? Advance agreement on what will be paid in each of the cells, actual valuations then revealed simultaneously.
* However: Cases with incentive compatible prices which encourage honest reporting do exist!  Reason: The probability that a profitable trade is forgone will be too high when  bluffing.
* In general: With private information: some value-maximizing plans cannot be realised.  Gains from transacting are missed.  Incentive efficient arrangements minimise these losses.  Note: with sufficiently large gains from trade, trade will occur!  Large number of participants: efficient agreements more difficult to reach.
* Bargaining Costs: costs of reaching a mutually acceptable agreement in order to: Avoid post contractual opportunism, minimise the use of private information against other part (pre contractual opportunism).
* Measurement Costs and Investment in Bargaining Position: Efficiency improved if these costs can be avoided, Note: measurement and inspection costs to reduce asymmetric information.
* Adverse Selection: In contracts offered to a large group of diverse subjects, Adverse selection, Frequency of individuals with unwanted characteristics higher among those who accept the offer than in the population.
* Consequences of Adverse Selection: adverse selection may result in complete market failure; If adverse selection rationing may produce higher profits than charging the “market clearning” price.  Remedies to adverse selection: SIGNALLING, an activity undertaken by the part with information in order to separate itself from low quality competitors.
* Credible signalling: For the signal to be credible: the signal must be observable, Signalling costs must be higher for low quality than for high quality types.  Note on signalling and efficiency: Signalling cost not necessarily productive.
* Screening: An activity undertaken by the uninformed part in order to attract good quality counterparts while keeping away low quality offers.
* COST OF TRUST IN NETWORKS: Honest signals, How Price informs... through relay of effective price changes, fluctuations.  Market response is immediate, it is the market’s Nervous System.  “Bearing”, refers to the manner of the posture, as well as the gestures and other aspects of the conduct (of an individual).
